Participatory processes
=======================

Engaging via participatory processes is essential to the third core principle and at the heart of the CLIMAAX Framework. It allows to include multiple bottom-up aspects that are relevant to undertake a comprehensive climate risk assessment. An inclusive approach is essential to translate and implement the CRA in the context of real-world experiences which are needed for shared, community adaptation strategies.
Regions may engage with stakeholders from policy or relevant public and private sectors, experts (scientists, practitioners or policy advisors with robust knowledge) or representatives from vulnerable or marginalized groups and exposed areas3. Participatory processes are fundamental for the assessment of vulnerability, which is often qualitative and value-laden, to appropriately take on issues of social justice, equity and adap-tive capacity. Increasingly complex climate risk and interplay with socio-economic vulnerabilities and exposure means that a more integrated approach to climate risk management is needed which also includes a comprehensive treatment of justice and inclusive governance structures and decision-making.
Exchange is encouraged throughout the CRA process with relevant stakeholders, experts and representatives by engaging in **bidirectional learning, communication and consultation**. While it is widely accepted that inclusion of multiple perspectives, the local context and knowledge is beneficial for an extensive CRA, this is a challenge in practice. It is recommended to place emphasis on developing a co-design process that fosters collaboration.
